Spread
Its massive spread moved westward as workers arrived at their offices and encountered 
messages generated by people from the East. Because the virus used mailing lists as 
its source of targets, the messages often appeared to come from an acquaintance and 
so might be considered safe, providing further incentive to open them. All it took
was a few users at each site to access the VBS attachment to generate the thousands 
and thousands of e-mails that would cripple e-mail systems under their weight, not 
to mention overwrite thousands of files on workstations and accessible servers.
Effects
It began in the Philippines on May 4, 2000, and spread across the world in one day 
(travelling from Hong-Kong to Europe to the United States), infecting 10 percent of all 
computers connected to the Internet and causing about $5.5 billion in damage. Most
of the damage was the labor of getting rid of the virus. The Pentagon, CIA, and the
British Parliament had to shut down their e-mail systems to get rid of the worm, as 
did most large corporations.
This particular malware caused widespread outrage, making it the most damaging 
worm ever. The worm overwrote important files, as well as music, multimedia and 
more, with a copy of itself. It also sent the worm to everyone on a user’s contact list. 
This particular worm only affected computers running the Microsoft Windows 
operating system. While any computer accessing e-mail could receive an ILOVEYOU
e-mail, only Microsoft Windows systems would be infected.
Authorship
The ILOVEYOU worm is believed to have been written by Michael Buen. The Barok 
trojan horse used by the worm is believed to have been written by Onel de Guzman, 
a Filipino student of AMA Computer University in Makati, Philippines.
An international manhunt for the perpetrator finally led to a young programming 
student. On May 11 (one week after the virus spread), he held a news conference and 
said that he did not mean to cause so much harm. He was unable to graduate because 
the university rejected his thesis on the basis of its illegality. Helped by a group of 
friends called the Grammersoft Group, he distributed his virus the day before the 
school held their graduation ceremony.
Detection
Narinnat Suksawat, a 25-year-old Thai software engineer, was the first person to write 
software that repaired the damage caused by the worm, releasing it to the public on 
May 5, 2000, 24 hours after the worm had spread. “Rational Killer”, the program he 
created, removed virus files and restored the previously removed system files so they 
again functioned normally. Two months later, Narinnat was offered a senior consultant job at Sun Microsystems and worked there for two years. He resigned to start his
own business. Today, Narinnat owns a software company named Moscii Systems, a 
system management software company in Thailand.
Architecture of the worm
The worm is written using Microsoft Visual Basic Scripting (VBS), and requires that 
the end-user run the script in order to deliver its payload. It will add a set of registry 
keys to the Windows registry that will allow the malware to start up at every boot.
The worm will then search all drives which are connected to the infected computer and 
replace files with the extensions *.JPG, *.JPEG, *.VBS, *.VBE, *.JS, *.JSE, *.CSS, *.WSH, 
*.SCT, *.DOC *.HTA with copies of itself, while appending to the file name a .VBS. 
extension. The malware will also locate *.MP3 and *.MP2 files, and when found, makes 
the files hidden, copies itself with the same file name and appends a .VBS.
The worm propagates by sending out copies of itself to all entries in the Microsoft 
Outlook address book. It also has an additional component, in which it will download and 
execute an infected program called variously “WIN-BUGSFIX.EXE” or “Microsoftv25.exe”. 
This is a password-stealing program which will e-mail cached passwords.